Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fB1ZaLfB2w
Language: en

Today we're going to do an in-depth discussion on harmony. We're going to talk about how chords are built, how chords are named, and some things to consider when choosing chord voicings for a progression. First, let's get some of the basic theory out of the way. Then, I'll show you some concepts you can incorporate into your own writing, arranging, and playing. The basic building blocks of harmony are intervals. This is the relationship between two notes. And we can assign numbers to notes to easily identify different interval types. So let's start with the C major scale. The notes are C, D, E, F, G, A, and B. And if we assign numbers to these notes, we get 1 2 3 4 5 6 and 7. So some of the most basic chords we have are triads. And there's four types of triads, but today we're really just going to focus on two. the major triad which is made of the one three and five from the major scale and then a minor triad which takes that third the note E and flattens it down a half step and makes it a minor third. We can also play sus chords where we take out the three alto together. For instance, we can replace the third with the second note from the scale D and play a sus 2 chord. [Music] We can also replace the third with the fourth, the note F. And that gives us a sus4 chord. From here we can start making four note chords. If we take the sixth note of the scale, the note A, and add this over our triads, we get a C major 6 chord and a C minor 6 chord. For instance, if we take this C major voicing and put an A in it, we get a C major 6. We could also voice this like this with A on top. Or another nice voicing is this. [Music] And we can do the same thing with the minor triad. Just flat the [Music] third. Of course, there's a bunch of voicings for these all over the fretboard, but these are some of the common ones that I use. Next, we can start adding the seventh note of the scale to these chords. And this is where things start getting interesting. If we take the seventh note from the major [Music] scale, the note B, and we add that to a C major triad, we get a C major 7 chord. And there's a bunch of great voicings for this that I use all the time. [Music] Then we can flatten that note from B down to B flat. And this gives us a C7 chord. Also referred to as a C dominant 7 chord. [Music] Then we can take our C minor triad and add a flat 7 to it and we get a C minor 7 chord. [Music] Then we can take that same C minor triad and add the major 7 to it and we get a really interesting chord, a C minor major 7 chord. [Music] So now we can start adding more notes on top of these four note seventh chords. And when we do that, we're going to use numbers beyond 1 through 7. This is what's referred to as upper extensions. And there's three types of upper extensions. The 9th, the 11th, and the 13. Now the nine is the same note in the scale as the two, but played above a seventh chord. So in the key of C, we would have 1 2 the note D. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. Again, a D here. Um the 11th is the same note as the four. 1 2 3 4. The note F. 5 6 7 8 9 10 11. There it is again. And this uh 13 is the same note as the six. 1 2 3 4 five six. this note a uh 7 8 9 10 11 12 13. Now, it's important to know that these numbers are only used when you're adding notes to a chord that already has some type of seventh in it. For instance, if you see C9 written on a chart, that means it's a C7 chord with a ninth added. So C7 with the note D added to it. So C, E, G, B flat, and D. And uh if you see a C major 9, that would mean a major 7 chord with the D added. So C, E, G, B, and D. And if you just have a basic triad and you want to add that ninth to it, that would be referred to as a C add9. So C, E, G, and the D added. Now, there's all kinds of variations to these upper extensions. We can flatten or sharpen these notes to give us different altered extensions. And this really all comes down to context, but let's take a look at a simple C major chord progression. This is what's referred to as a 251 progression. And in its most basic form, it's D minor, G major to C major. And if we play these as four note seventh chords in the key of C major, we get D minor 7, G7, and C major 7. Now, there's two concepts we're going to discuss today for choosing extensions to color this chord progression. Now, the first concept is the idea of using a common tone that stays consistent throughout the chord progression to connect the different chords together. So, for this first example, we're going to use the common tone of B. We're going to keep that note consistent in all of these chords. And when we do that, we wind up with a D minor 6 [Music] chord, a G major chord, or a G7 chord, and a C major 7 [Music] chord. So, that same B note stays consistent throughout all these voicings. [Music] And of course, we can voice this in different places around the fretboard. [Music] Next up, we're going to use the note D as our common tone to thread all these chords together. If we play a D minor triad right here with D on top, we can connect that together with a G7 voicing with D on top. And then finally a C major 9 chord with D on top to get a really nice and pretty combination of [Music] chords. Next up, let's use the common tone of E to thread these chords together. This is going to give us a D minor 9 for the first chord with that E on top. Then a G13 with the E on top again. And finally a C major 7. And that E is the third of the chord. So it's giving us two nice colorful extensions for the D minor and for the G. And then it's one of the basic chord tones of the C major triad. Um so again, it's up to you to decide what sounds you like. Um, but this is just an exercise to give you different options, things to consider when you're uh choosing extensions for your different chords. Let's do one last one. This is going to be um kind of an interesting one. We're actually going to use uh G as our common tone. And when we play this um over our D minor chord, we actually get a D minor 11 chord, which has a nice sound. And then we can play um let's use a G7 flat 13 chord. And then we'll round this out with a C 69 chord. This is a chord that has the six in it and the ninth in it. So we get [Music] really nice, beautiful chord. And this kind of segus into the next concept I want to talk about, which is voice leading, right? This is the idea of using chromatic movement within the chords to connect the dots. So instead of using one common note um that stays consistent throughout the chord progression, sort of threads them together, now we're going to move one note chromatically down or up with each chord. So this is an example of descending voice leading. Um we have this E from our our D minor 9 chord. Again, we're playing the G on top. That's our common tone. But within it, we've got E. And then when we play the flat 13, the G flat 13, we're moving that down a half step. And finally, our C 69 chord. So we have this little descending chromatic movement within the chord, which is a really cool concept. So let's dig into some examples of descending voice leading we can use with the same chord progression. So we did our D minor 9 to G7 flat 13 to C69 and that has our E to E flat to D chromatic movement. This time around let's do A to A flat to G. and we'll play a D minor or a D minor 7 with that A on top. Then we'll play a G7 with a flat on top. That's going to give us a G7 flat N voicing. And then we'll round that out with a C major 7 with the fifth G on top. [Music] So really pretty voicings and uh a great way to think about chords when you're trying to figure out how to use altered extensions and different tension building colorful notes. So this next example we're going to move from D down to D flat then to C. This is kind of an interesting one, but we're going to start out pretty standard with just a D minor triad with D on top. Then we're going to play a G7 chord with that D flat on top. This is a G7 sharp 11 chord. And finally, we'll play a C major 7 with C on [Music] top. All right. Right. So, for this final descending example, we're going to move from B to B flat to A. And for this first chord, we're going to play a D minor 6 chord with B on top. Then we'll play a G7 sharp N chord. I'm actually going to put the flat 13 in it, too. Um, and then finally, we'll play like a C6 chord, or I can play it with the major 7 and make it a major 13 chord. So, all right. So, now some examples of ascending voice leading. We could play a D minor or a D minor 7 with A on top. Then a G7 sharp nine with B flat on top. And then finally a C major 7 with the major 7, the note B on top. Right? So we could also play D minor triad with D on top up to a G7 flat 13 with E flat on top. And finally a C major 7 with E on top. [Music] So another example that uses the uh G7 sharp 11 chord is to play a D minor 7 with the flat 7, the note C on top. Then a G7 sharp 11 with D flat on top. And then finally a C major 9 with D on top. That's a really cool [Music] one. Really interesting way of interpreting a 251. Um and finally this final one I'm going to show you um is a D minor 11 with G on top. Then a G7 flat N with a flat on top. And then finally a C6 chord or C major 13 chord with A on top. All right. So now we can start taking these descending chromatic movements and combine them with the ascending uh chromatic voice leading. And this is a really interesting way of using upper extensions. This first example we're going to take a D minor 9 voicing. Right? This is the root fifth flat 7 9 and fifth on top. And we're going to use this chromatic movement going up from A to B flat to B. And we're can combine that with the descending movement from E to E flat to D. And we wind up with these voicings. We get a D minor 9, then a G uh sharp 9 flat 13. And I'm playing that without the root. You could put the root on the bottom, but um and then finally, we're going to get a C major 9. Or you could look at this as a G triad over C. Um like G over C. So what you end up with is this counterpoint movement where on top we have A to B flat up to B. But within the chord we have E down to E flat finally down to D. So a really unique uh way of using upper extensions. [Music] All right. Another example of this counterpoint movement um is if we play a D minor bar chord right here um to a G7 flat 9 flat 13 right here and then finally up to this basic C major 7 bar chord right here. This is going to give us this movement of D to E flat to E, but then also on top A to A flat to G, [Music] right? But then [Music] also All right. So, one last example that uses this contrary motion. Um, we're going to play a D minor 11 chord, then our G7 with the flat N and the flat 13, and finally a C major 13. Um, this is going to have this downward movement of E to E flat to D and then the upward movement of G to G sharp or A flat to A. So the top note of our D minor 11 chord, the 11, then moves to the flat N of G, and then finally [Music] the 13. um of the C chord and the nine within this D minor chord moves down to the flat 13 of our G altered chord and then to the nine of the C major chord. So really colorful, really unique way of using these extensions. [Music] So, these are just a few of the ways we can color this chord progression with the use of upper extensions. And I really encourage you to experiment with these approaches on your own. It's up to you to decide what sounds good to you and what works in the context of the music you're making. If you'd like the tabs and notation to the different examples in this lesson, head over to my Patreon page. The link is down in the description. And until next time, happy practicing and take care.